Improve RBAC documentation (#270)
kubeshop/botkube-docs: docs/configuration/rbac.md

sidebar_position: 4
---

Botkube allows plugins to access Kubernetes API by defining [RBAC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Role-based_access_control) rules as part of plugin `context.rbac` configuration. Kubeconfig generation needs to be requested by defining `context.rbac` property.

> Based on this configuration Botkube generates a temporary [kubeconfig](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/organize-cluster-access-kubeconfig/) file with user and/or group impersonation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on this configuration Botkube generates a temporary [kubeconfig](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/organize-cluster-access-kubeconfig/) with user and/or group impersonation.
```

This kubeconfig is available to plugins in the `Execute` and `Stream` contexts.

## Architecture

Botkube uses its own cluster credentials to generate a temporary kubeconfig, and the kubeconfig uses [user/group impersonation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#user-impersonation).

For source plugins, the kubeconfig is generated once - during plugin startup.

> For executor plugins, the kubeconfig is generated every time a command is sent to the plugin, which allows greater flexibility, such as including the name of the channel the command was sent from in the
> kubeconfig generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For executor plugins, the kubeconfig is generated every time a command is sent to the plugin, which allows greater flexibility, such as including the name of the channel the command was sent from.
```

![diagram](assets/botkube-read-only.svg "diagram")

## Configuration

> Each executor and source plugin can provide a `context` section with `rbac` config. This config is used to generate a dedicated kubeconfig.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each executor and source plugin, you can define a `context.rbac` configuration.
```
it doesn't sound right for me when we tell that "plugin can" 🤔

- `ChannelName`

  Channel name is used as subject for user or group impersonation. The channel name is prepended with an optional prefix.
  This mapping is only available for executor plugins.

### Default configuration

When a given plugin have `context.rbac` property undefined, Botkube doesn't generate a kubeconfig for this plugin. To request kubeconfig generation, define `context.rbac` property with empty value:

```yaml
executors:
  "kubectl":
    botkube/kubectl@v1:
      enabled: true
      # ...
      context:
        rbac: {} # enable kubeconfig generation
```

However, such configuration will generate a kubeconfig with empty impersonation config, which effectively means an anonymous access to the Kubernetes API.

During Botkube installation, Botkube generates Kubernetes ClusterRole and ClusterRoleBinding resources with read-only access for the default group `botkube-plugins-default`. This group is used by default across the `values.yaml` for all default plugins.

```yaml
rbac:
  # ...
  create: true
  rules: # rules for the default static group
    - apiGroups: ["*"]
      resources: ["*"]
      verbs: ["get", "watch", "list"]

>   staticGroupName: &static-group-name "botkube-plugins-default" # group name used in the `values.yaml` file for default plugins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  staticGroupName: "botkube-plugins-default" # group name used in the `values.yaml` file for default plugins
```

Author: I thought about it, and initially removed the anchor, but then I restored it to be closer to the `values.yaml` content 🤔 However I don't have strong opinion here, so I'll remove it 👍

        rbac:
          # no user mapping defined
          group:
            type: Static
            static:
              value: botkube-plugins-default
```

It is equivalent to:

```yaml
executors:
  "kubectl":
    botkube/kubectl@v1:
      enabled: true
      # ...
      context:
        rbac:
          user:
            type: Static
            static:
              value: botkube-internal-static-user
          group:
            type: Static
            static:
              value: botkube-plugins-default
```

#### Defaults for Botkube Cloud

When configuring plugin on Botkube Cloud, the "Default" permissions mean that the `botkube-plugins-default` group will be used, which have read-only access to Kubernetes API and is configured during Botkube installation. See the [Default configuration](#default-configuration) section.

![Cloud RBAC defaults](./assets/cloud-rbac-default.png)

## Examples

This paragraph contains examples of RBAC configuration for different use cases.

:::tip
You can use `extraObjects` override during Botkube installation. See the [`values.yaml`](https://github.com/kubeshop/botkube/blob/v1.3.0/helm/botkube/values.yaml#L1059) for more details.
:::

> ### Use default RBAC configuration

Reviewer: TBH I do not understand this section. Also, the padding is wrong, and the comma is missing.
![Screenshot 2023-08-22 at 12 34 50](https://github.com/kubeshop/botkube-docs/assets/17568639/e6546e12-3f37-400e-a4cd-9c86ced8fd46)

I would remove it, or we need to rephrase it. BTW above, you already have a section with:

``````markdown
executors:
  "kubectl":
    botkube/kubectl@v1:
      enabled: true
      # ...
      context:
        rbac: {} # enable kubeconfig generation
```

Here we define a plugin with _Static_ mapping to **User.rbac.authorization.k8s.io** `kubectl-read-only`.
However, such configuration will generate a kubeconfig with empty impersonation config, which effectively means an anonymous access to the Kubernetes API.
``````

Author: Right, I forgot to remove it as I introduced it above 🙈

### Kubernetes source plugin with read-only access based on static user mapping

In this example a single source plugin is defined with static RBAC that maps to user `kubernetes-read-only`.

1. Consider the following Botkube config:

   ```yaml
   sources:
     "kubernetes":
       botkube/kubernetes@v1:
         enabled: true
         # ...
         context:
           rbac:
             user:
               type: Static
               static:
                 value: kubernetes-read-only
   ```

1. Consider the following Kubernetes RBAC configuration:

   ```yaml
     apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
     kind: ClusterRole
     metadata:
       name: reader
     rules:
     - apiGroups: ["*"]
       resources: ["*"]
       verbs: ["get", "watch", "list"]
     ---
     apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
     kind: ClusterRoleBinding
     metadata:
       name: reader
     roleRef:
       apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
       kind: ClusterRole
       name: reader
     subjects:
     - kind: User

>        name: kubernetes-read-only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       name: kubernetes-read-only # <-- this is the username used in Botkube config
```

to match the previous section
